Adding more docs for delayed data detection (#36738)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/ml/delayed-data-detection.asciidoc

[role="xpack"]
[[ml-delayed-data-detection]]
=== Working with delayed data

In short, delayed data are any documents that are indexed *after* a datafeed has already gathered data for the 

> point in time referenced in the data time-field value.

Reviewer: Thanks, that's clearer. I wonder if it could be simplified further like this:

_Delayed data_ are documents that are indexed late. That is to say, it is data
related to a time that the {dfeed} has already processed.

When you create a datafeed, you can specify a {ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html[`query_delay`] setting.
This setting enables the datafeed to wait for some time past real-time, which means any "late" data in this period
is fully index before the datafeed tries to gather it. However, if the setting is set too low, the datafeed may query
for data before it has been indexed and consequently miss that document. Conversely, if it is set too high,
analysis drifts farther away from real-time. The balance that is struck depends upon each use case and
the environmental factors of the cluster.

==== Why worry about delayed data?

This is a particular prescient question. If there are data missing randomly (perhaps due to ingest delays), the results of
certain types of functions are not really affected. Statistically, it all comes out ok in the end as the missing data is

> distributed randomly. An example would be a `mean` metric for a field in a large collection of data.

Reviewer: Is there a difference between "missing data" and "delayed data"?  I would think the former never arrives, whereas the latter arrives late.

Author: Correct, but the concepts here expand out to the more general case of "missing data". I can restrict it down to just "late" for clarity as it is still correct.

Reviewer: Thanks, I think either this page needs to be restricted to talking about "delayed data" or we need to add more information about missing and delayed data differ (and how/if they're handled differently).  The latter sounds interesting to me, but maybe beyond the scope of this PR.

In this case, checking for delayed data may not provide much benefit. However, jobs with a `low_count` function may
provide false positives if data is consistently delayed. In this situation, it would be useful to see if data
comes in after an anomaly is recorded so that you can determine a next course of action.

==== How do we detect delayed data?

In addition to the `query_delay` field, there is a
{ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html#ml-datafeed-delayed-data-check-config[delayed data check config], which enables you to

> configuring the datafeed to look in the past for delayed data. Every 15 minutes or every `check_window`,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configure the datafeed to look in the past for delayed data. Every 15 minutes or every `check_window`,
```

whichever is smaller, the datafeed triggers a document search over the configured indices. This search looks over a
time-span with length of `check_window` ending with the latest finalized bucket. That time-span is partitioned into buckets,

> whose length equals bucket span of the associated job. The `doc_count` of those buckets are then compared with the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
whose length equals the bucket span of the associated job. The `doc_count` of those buckets are then compared with the
```

job's finalized analysis buckets to see whether any data has arrived since the analysis.

> 

Author: The user is alerted, the actual mechanics of the alerting are in limbo right now with the addition of Annotations. I can mention that there is a message generated, but I don't really want to tie this down to an implementation detail.

> 

Reviewer: Thanks, anything that helps users know when they need to take action is great

[role="xpack"]
[[ml-delayed-data-detection]]
=== Working with delayed data

Delayed data are documents that are indexed late. That is to say, it is data
related to a time that the {dfeed} has already processed.

When you create a datafeed, you can specify a {ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html[`query_delay`] setting.
This setting enables the datafeed to wait for some time past real-time, which means any "late" data in this period

> is fully index before the datafeed tries to gather it. However, if the setting is set too low, the datafeed may query

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is fully indexed before the datafeed tries to gather it. However, if the setting is set too low, the datafeed may query
```

for data before it has been indexed and consequently miss that document. Conversely, if it is set too high,
analysis drifts farther away from real-time. The balance that is struck depends upon each use case and
the environmental factors of the cluster.

==== Why worry about delayed data?

> This is a particularly prescient question. If there are data delayed randomly (and consequently missing from analysis),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a particularly prescient question. If data is delayed randomly (and consequently missing from analysis),
```

Author: @lcawl `data` is plural is it not? So it should be if `data are` yes?

Author: ```suggestion
This is a particularly prescient question. If data are delayed randomly (and consequently missing from analysis),
```

Reviewer: Apparently that's one of those questions that folks like to wrestle over. We don't have it in our style guide at this point, so either is likely fine for now.

the results of certain types of functions are not really affected. Statistically, it all comes out ok in the end 

> as the delayed data is distributed randomly. An example would be a `mean` metric for a field in a large collection of data.

Reviewer: I don't really think the "Statistically..." sentence adds any new information.

> In this case, checking for delayed data may not provide much benefit. However, jobs with a `low_count` function may

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this case, checking for delayed data may not provide much benefit. If data is consistently delayed, however, jobs with a `low_count` function may
```

Author: ```suggestion
In this case, checking for delayed data may not provide much benefit. If data are consistently delayed, however, jobs with a `low_count` function may
```

> provide false positives if data is consistently delayed. In this situation, it would be useful to see if data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
provide false positives. In this situation, it would be useful to see if data
```

In addition to the `query_delay` field, there is a
{ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html#ml-datafeed-delayed-data-check-config[delayed data check config], which enables you to
configure the datafeed to look in the past for delayed data. Every 15 minutes or every `check_window`,
whichever is smaller, the datafeed triggers a document search over the configured indices. This search looks over a
time span with a length of `check_window` ending with the latest finalized bucket. That time span is partitioned into buckets,
whose length equals the bucket span of the associated job. The `doc_count` of those buckets are then compared with the
job's finalized analysis buckets to see whether any data has arrived since the analysis. If there is indeed missing data
due to their ingest delay, the end user is notified.

==== What to do about delayed data?

The most common course of action is to simply to do nothing. For many functions and situations ignoring the data is
acceptable. However, if the amount of delayed data is too great or the situation calls for it, the next course
of action to consider is to increase the `query_delay` of the datafeed. This increased delay allows more time for data to be

> indexed. However, that may not be desirable depending on what real-time constraints there are in the system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
indexed. If you have real-time constraints, however, an increased delay might not be desirable.
```

[role="xpack"]
[[ml-delayed-data-detection]]
=== Working with delayed data

In short, delayed data are any documents that have been indexed *AFTER* a Datafeed has gathered data
from the index at that point in time.

When creating a {ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html[Datafeed Configuration], one may supply the option

> `query_delay`. This allows the Datafeed to wait for some time past real-time to allow any "late" data to be fully index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This setting enables the datafeed to wait for some time past real-time, which means any "late" data in this period is fully indexed
```

> before trying to gather it. However, if the setting is set too low, the Datafeed may query for data before it has been

Reviewer: ```suggestion
before the datafeed tries to gather it. However, if the setting is set too low, the datafeed may query for data before it has been
```

> indexed, and consequently missing that document. Conversely, if it is set too high, analysis drifts farther away from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
indexed and consequently miss that document. Conversely, if it is set too high, analysis drifts farther away from
```

real-time. The balance that is struck depends upon each use case and the environmental factors of the cluster.

==== Why worry about delayed data?

> This is a particular prescient question. Certain types of detectors are not really effected by randomly missing data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a particular prescient question. Certain types of detectors are not really affected by randomly missing data
```

> due to ingest delays. Statistically, it all comes out ok in the end as the missing data is distributed randomly. An

Reviewer: It is unclear what part of the sentence "due to" applies to. Maybe makes more sense to say something like:
If there is data missing randomly (for example, due to ingestion delays), certain types of detectors are unaffected.

example would be a `mean` metric for a field in a large collection of data. In this case, checking for delayed data

> may not provide much benefit. However, Job's with a `low_count` function may provide false positives if data is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
may not provide much benefit. However, jobs with a `low_count` function may provide false positives if data is
```

consistently delayed. In this situation, it would be useful to see if data comes in after an anomaly is recorded

> so that one can determine a next course of action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so that you can determine a next course of action.
```

==== How do we detect delayed data?

> In addition to the aforementioned `query_delay` field,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the `query_delay` field,
```

> {ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html#ml-datafeed-delayed-data-check-config[Delayed Data Check Config] allows configuring

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{ref}/ml-datafeed-resource.html#ml-datafeed-delayed-data-check-config[delayed data check config], which enables you to configure
```

> the Datafeed to look in the past for delayed data. Every 15 minutes or every `check_window`, whichever is smaller, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the datafeed to look in the past for delayed data. Every 15 minutes or every `check_window`, whichever is smaller, the
```

> Datafeed will trigger a document search over the configured indices. This search looks over a time-span with length of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
datafeed triggers a document search over the configured indices. This search looks over a time-span with length of
```

`check_window` ending with the latest finalized bucket. That time-span is partitioned into buckets, whose length equals

> the associated Job's `bucket_span`. The `doc_count` of those buckets are then compared with the Job's finalized analysis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bucket span of the associated job. The `doc_count` of those buckets are then compared with the job's finalized analysis
```

> buckets to see if any data has arrived since our analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
buckets to see whether any data has arrived since the analysis.
```

==== What to do about delayed data?

The most common course of action is to simply to do nothing. For many functions and situations ignoring the data is

> acceptable. However, if the amount of delayed data is too great, or the situation calls for it, the next course

Reviewer: ```suggestion
acceptable. However, if the amount of delayed data is too great or the situation calls for it, the next course
```

> of action to consider is to increase the `query_delay` of the Datafeed. This will allow more time for data to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of action to consider is to increase the `query_delay` of the datafeed. This increased delay allows more time for data to be
```

indexed. However, that may not be desirable depending on what real-time constraints there are in the system.

> In which case, one would have to {ref}/tune-for-indexing-speed.html[tune for better indexing speed.]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In which case, you would have to {ref}/tune-for-indexing-speed.html[tune for better indexing speed.]
```

NOTE: All uses of the cumbersome compound `real-time` refer to a "time closer to now, than not".

> This, of course, is determined by the situation at hand and does not necessarily refer to the concept of "now".

Reviewer: This is a little unwieldy.  Is it necessary?

Reviewer 2: I agree this is unnecessary in this docs page.  I guess it originates from the discussion with Steve and Shay about "what is real-time?", but even if we do need to elaborate on that somewhere I don't think this is the place.
